this is what gaza's Farms used to look
like thriving Olive Groves Strawberry
Fields and Green Houses bursting with
tomatoes much of that is now
gone the Israel Hamas war in Gaza has
destroyed gaza's ability to produce
their own food once the war is finally
over will they ever be able to
sustainably grow food again 1 billion US
Dollars uh destruction and and the
agricultural
uh uh sectors it was really shocking to
me we are facing the huge problem of the
water there are many ways to assess the
costs of Israel's war in Gaza one is
what activists and researchers call an
ecosite it's the destruction of the
Flora and the found it's a deliberate
Act of equaide the deliberate Act of the
destruction of an environment so much so
that it cannot be inhabited
today most of the world Associates Gaza
with images like this but people who
know the territory well remember it very
differently Gaza is not the Gaza that we
know now the territory was once largely
self-sufficient in producing
vegetables
fruit Dairy Meat and
Fish no need to import any of this the
the best the best fruit of bell peer I
saw it was in
Rafa agronomist nasar quad from the a
organization anira has worked with
Farmers across the Palestinian
territories for many years the the best
uh strawberries you'll find them in the
North in uh in be and it's well known uh
for uh uh strawberries in the years
before the current War
the Gaza Strip grew so much produce that
they could export some of it mostly
strawberries tomatoes and cucumbers to
the West Bank in
Israel Gaza farmer farmers are very
smart very Innovative they are insisting
they never surrender because they love
their
[Music]
land 10 months into the war abundant
harvests have given way to destruction
and a dire humanitarian
crisis Regional authorities in the Gaza
Strip say that the Israeli military blew
up over 30 water wells in July alone the
water shortage impacts use for drinking
personal hygiene cooking and washing but
it also impacts crops both in the short
and long term you know agriculture
without water is nothing there is there
is an a heavy destruction of of the
water infrastructure Mahmud El Saka
joined the NGO Confederation Oxfam in
2015 he currently oversees the
organization's food security and
livelihood support in Gaza the
irrigation networks the carer lines and
also the demolitions of of the land and
even the water wells for agriculture
even destroyed the un's food and
agriculture organization says the
invasion of the Israeli military has
brought agricultural activities almost
to a complete
halt many gazen farmers especially those
in the North had to flee their homes and
Farms following Israeli evacuation
orders they were telling us that they've
heard their Farms have been destroyed
they've heard that kind of like there's
nothing left of their Greenhouse or
their farm San maafi is a researcher
with forensic architecture a
london-based University Research group
that investigates State and corporate
violence their recent research has
identified more than 2,000 agricultural
sites that have been destroyed since
October
2023 that's when Israel began its
current military offensive vowing to
eradicate Hamas following the group's
terror attack on
Israel forensic architecture has
documented what happened to this family
run Farm in Northern Gaza which used to
grow olives pomegranates and citrus
fruits all the trees are taken out all
the crops are taken out um the the
surface of the Earth has been raised um
New Roads have been put in place new
Earthworks have been put in place
effectively the area has become a kind
of a um a a kind of like a military base
you know bulldozers come and they
excavate everything uh if Fields
Orchards green houses and Destroy
whatever uh in front of uh uh them this
is one thing the other the other thing
is the
bombing what I saw is a really rapid
development of the damage to the land it
was really shocking to me he Yin is a
satellite imagery analyst and assistant
professor at Ken State University
his work is visualizing evidence of the
destruction of gaza's tree crops as the
war continued our analysis um found that
until early July 2024 more than half the
agriculture fields in Gaza were
destroyed satellite data is one valuable
source of evidence to map landscape
changes like damage or
destruction another is on the ground
information such qualitative findings
are the foundation of forensic architect
ur's research looking at a site only
from distance using satellite is not
enough often with our work we have um an
Insight from the ground that confirms
what what we see on a satellite is
actually taking place echoside is a term
preferred by some research and activists
who understand Israel's destruction of
gaza's agricultural sector and
livelihood to be deliberate we put this
allegation to the Israeli military they
say that all of their operations aim to
dismantle hamas's military capabilities
and that the militant group often
operates from agricultural
land but forensic architecture also says
Israel's destruction of Gaz and
agricultural Farms is not new and even
predates the war by several years I
think um it was um around
2018 that we were asked by farmers in um
a to investigate the destruction of
their crops we were told by the farmers
that um uh these crop dusters Israeli
crop dusters are flying very close to
the Border maybe even you know they
couldn't tell exactly what side of the
Border it is they're flying very close
to the border and they're spraying
herbicide and the herbicidal particles
are coming and covering their Fields the
Israeli Ministry of Defense confirmed
that aerial herbicides were sprayed
along the width of the perimeter of Gaza
we realize they're happening twice a
year right before the Harvest
Time the majority of the crops in Gaza
they are tree crops like Olive like a
pistachio you know fruit trees as well
and it take years to grow so if the war
and tomorrow let's say it will still
take years or maybe forever to recover
of the agriculture sectors tree crops
like the Olive Tree need at least 3
years before they bear their first fruit
field crops like tomatoes are easier to
grow but require an average of 2 to 3 l
of fresh water per day the Legacy and
tradition of cultivating fresh produce
remains a point of Pride for many gazin
who manage thriving pet es even amid the
rubble one of these Farmers is
24-year-old Yousef Abu rabi who is
trying to revive his family's destroyed
Farm in a north of the strip
what will it take to restore gaza's once
thriving agricultural landscape and will
it ever
[Music]
recover we need to have a full access
for the different inputs equipments
tools for the agricultural sectors they
can uh build Gaza if if there is an
international will and there is
international support if the borders are
open and uh and the orts are allowed in
and I don't know if we can um repair
what has been lost but I want to also
say that
Palestinians um are a PE like are people
of resistance um that they know their
land best and if there is anyone who can
repair this land that's them